Courtney act Park outside the Serbian
capital Belgrade in May 1914 a Bosnian
student gabrielle o Princip came here
with a Browning pistol for some target
practice
[Music]
Princip was 19 years old according to
his instructor he was not a very good
shot other students were much more
confident whenever Princip must the
target people standing around would
laugh at him that would drive them to
tears
out of sight in the forest he had a
chance to get his eye in shooting at
trees his ultimate goal was far more
ambitious I am an adherent of the
radical anarchist idea which aims at
destroying the present system through
terrorism in 1914 princip's wish was
granted
[Music]
the first world war began almost by
accident it ended just a strangely in
between it was more destructive than any
war had ever been more British French
and Italian soldiers died in the first
world war then died in a second
[Music]
it was the first genuinely global
conflict fought not just on the fields
of France and Flanders but up mountains
across deserts at sea and in the air
[Music]
the first world war shaped the 20th
century it sparked the Russian
Revolution
it launched America is a world power
[Music]
the fault lines from its failed peace
settlement led the world to a second
terrible war barely 20 years later then
to the Cold War but the ideas the men of
1914 fought for still shape our world
today nationalism and democracy the rule
of international law and the rights of
nations
now after the collapse of communism the
European map resembles the one redrawn
by the first world war we live with its
unresolved bitter consequences in the
Middle East and the Balkans and it was
in the Balkans that it all began nearly
a hundred years ago
at the start of the 20th century as at
its close the Balkans were the most
unstable part of Europe here three great
empires fought for power and influence
the austro-hungarian the Russian and the
Ottoman
for hundreds of years the Ottoman Turks
had the upper hand Serbia Bosnia Albania
were under their control
they built over 80 mosques in Serbian
Belgrade but by the 1900s only this one
was left Serbia had thrown the Turks out
and set herself up as an independent
Slav Kingdom but right on Serbia's
border was an even greater challenge to
Slav nationalism the old Turks of the
south have gone but new enemies come
from the north more fearsome and
dangerous than the old they want to take
our freedom and our language from us and
crushes the enemy to the north was the
austro-hungarian Empire
that extraordinary Empire known as the
austrian-hungarian Dual Monarchy is less
an empire or a kingdom or a state than
the personal property of the Hapsburgs
whose hereditary talent for the
acquisition of land is recorded on the
map of Europe today
[Music]
the Empire was ruled by Franz Joseph
he sat on two thrones as emperor of
austria and king of hungary by 1914 had
been in charge for 66 years he had spent
them trying to resist change of any kind
in all the empire only the Hungarians
and Austrians had any real power for
countries like Serbia Austria Hungary
was the prison of nations a repressive
undemocratic state that grounds small
peoples under its hue
austria-hungary is also a key part of
European security a multinational Empire
keeping the peace on the borders of the
West
it contained at least 10 different
nationalities not just Austrians and
Hungarians but Czechs Slovaks poles
Romanians Italians Croats and Bosnians
but it was also an empire in a state of
constant crisis by 1914 had been ethnic
unrest in nearly every part of the
austro-hungarian Empire local
Parliament's were suspended troops
brought in to restore order
austria-hungary's domestic problems gave
opportunities to her enemies
[Music]
chief amongst them Serbia she welcomed
national unrest particularly in Croatia
and Bosnia Serbia wanted the breakup of
the empire
then she could incorporate all the Slavs
within it into a South Slav super state
Yugoslavia
that our guten dmitriyevitch was an
officer in the Serbian army he opposed
any kind of friendship with Austria the
blind surrender to Austria's embrace was
a most shameful betrayal of Serbian
traditions I realized that Serbia must
in full measure become the leader not
only a Serbs part of Yugoslavia
dmitriyevich was also one of the
founding members of the Black Hand a
secret military society they used
terrorism and assassination to try and
establish Yugoslavia
[Music]
he is said to have sent men to murder
austro-hungarian military leaders and
cabinet ministers he allegedly tried to
kill Emperor Franz Joseph one saw him
nowhere yet one knew that he was doing
everything
by the spring of 1914 Gavrilo Princip
was in belgrade talkin revolution with
his friends
[Music]
then they heard that Archduke Franz
Ferdinand the heir to the
austro-hungarian throne would visit
Sarajevo in June the plans hatched by
the young Bosnians reached the ears of
dmitriyevich and the black hand
[Music]
major wire tank usage also in the black
hand went to dmitriyevitch with a
question about some bosnian nudes
pestering me these kids want to pull off
some great deed in any cost they've
heard that Franz Ferdinand his
Carrington Bosnian and I'm begged me to
let him go there what do you say Franz
Ferdinand was going to Bosnia to observe
the austro-hungarian armies maneuvers in
the hills outside Sarajevo
[Music]
as chief of serbian military
intelligence dmitriyevich feared these
maneuvers were a smokescreen that what
franz ferdinand really planned was an
invasion of Serbia
princip's planned to murder Franz
Ferdinand's suited him perfectly fine he
said let him go
unlike every laprincia Archduke Franz
Ferdinand was an excellent shot
one of his castles Connor pitched in
what is now the Czech Republic is full
of the evidence by the age of 50 he'd
shot five thousand stags as well as two
hundred thousand other animals all
carefully numbered by 1914 franz
ferdinand was emperor in waiting
everyone knew it couldn't be long before
his uncle died even the official
portrait was ready franz ferdinand with
the Stars and sash only the Emperor
could well
he had no time for the etiquette and
convention that hemmed in the Vienna
Court he defied his uncle by marrying
sophie ho tech who was not of royal
blood
the most intelligent thing I've ever
done in my life has been the marriage to
myself she is everything to me my wife
my adviser my doctor my guardian angel
Franz Ferdinand also had radical ideas
for political reform he thought this was
the best way to keep the multinational
Austrian Empire on its feet and protect
his own future as Emperor above all
Franz Ferdinand wants to avoid war in
the Balkans one night he made an
after-dinner toast to peace what would
we get out of war with Serbia we'd lose
the lives of young men and would spend
money better used elsewhere and what
would be gained for heaven's sake a few
plum trees some pastures full of goat
dragons and a bunch of rebellious
killers
Gavrilo Princip crossed the border from
Serbia and austria-hungary at the Drina
River from here he made his way to
Sarajevo where he met up with six others
in on the plant
the Serbian major tank usage had
supplied them with four pistols six
bombs and suicide pills in case of
capture
franz ferdinand chose the date of his
visit badly Sarajevo was decked in flags
for the occasion but the 20th of June
was Serbian National Day a natural focus
for hatred of a hapsburgs as a Serbian
ambassador to Vienna warned this will
cause much discontent some young Serb
might put a live round rather than a
blank in his gun and fire it therefore
it might be good if Archduke Franz
Ferdinand were not to go to Sarajevo but
the Austrians laughed off the
ambassador's fears on the morning of the
28th of June Franz Ferdinand and Sophie
arrived by train in Sarajevo
despite the warning security was light
as the procession passed the first
bridge The Conspirator there threw his
bomb
it bounced off the car exploding behind
and wounding two officers and some on
lookers Franz Ferdinand stopped to ask
after the casualties before hurrying on
to the town hall
official security was now on high alert
Gavrilo Princip gave up and turned to go
home
stopping on Franz Josef Street to buy a
sandwich then his luck changed Franz
Ferdinand had left the town hall but his
driver took a wrong turn at the corner
of Franz Josef Street
[Music]
as the Royal car tried to reverse on to
the main road Princip came face to face
with his target at that moment I heard
the crack of a pistol shot followed
swiftly by another and saw in the same
split-second a man standing right in
front of me being thrown to the ground
by the people around him and the shining
saber of a security guard descending on
him a thin stream of blood spurted from
his Highnesses mouth onto my right cheek
the Duchess cried out in heaven's name
what has happened to you then she slid
off the seat and lay on the floor of the
car
I thought she had simply fainted then I
heard his imperial Highness say suffer
suffer don't die stay alive for the
children I asked him if he was in great
pain he answered me quite distinctly
it's nothing Franz Ferdinand and Sophie
died on the way to hospital
their funeral was held in Vienna on the
4th of July
Oskar Potiorek the governor of Bosnia
had already written to the foreign
ministry calling for austria-hungary to
take revenge against Serbia
[Music]
we must take the first opportunity for a
destructive blow against serbia to give
the monarchy a few decades of calm
internal development Serbia must learn
to fear us again
[Music]
in life the crown prince had been a
champion of peaceful coexistence with
Serbia
in death he was becoming a cause for war
[Music]
even before the assassination
austro-hungarian chief of staff conrad
von hotzendorf had pressed for war
against serbia no fewer than 20 times
now he made his case again I expressed
to his majesty
my opinion that war with Serbia was
unavoidable that is entirely correct
said his majesty but how are you going
to wage war if everyone in particular
Russia is going to attack us
we have backing from Germany I replied
His Majesty gave me a searching look and
said can you be certain of that this was
the moment when what could have been
just another war in the Balkans began to
turn into the first world war
austro-hungarian Emperor Franz Josef now
asked the German Kaiser for support on
the 6th of July he got just the answer
he wanted the German government is if
the opinion that we must decide what is
to be done whatever we decide we may
always be certain that we will find
Germany at our side a faithful ally and
friend of our monarchy
Germany's kaiser wilhelm ii was queen
victoria's oldest grandson he was a
flamboyant character with no eye for
detail
he had an immature streak desperate to
be popular often petulant
the Kings insecurities matter little if
he has no power but the Kaiser was
Germany's commander in chief its supreme
warlord Germany's crucial decision to
back Austria was made with no care for
the consequences
neither the Kaiser nor his senior
political and military leaders took any
steps to find out how far
austria-hungary was prepared to go it
was Germany's confidence support that
pushed Austria forward but far from
plunging the world into war in 1914 out
of aggression Germany was just nudging
it closer out of incompetence and
wishful thinking the Kaiser was so sure
no war was brewing that he went on
holiday
[Music]
but any local Balkan conflict had the
potential to set Europe alight given
that Europe was divided into two
volatile camps on the one side with
Germany Austria Hungary and Italy on the
other were France and Russia
if austere attacked Serbia Russia might
leak to her aid and attack Austria then
Germany would have to fight to protect
Austria
this document was Austria's excuse for
war it was filled with demands so
extreme and insulting that Serbia could
never accept them but just in case they
did the Austrian ambassador in Belgrade
was ordered to reject any reply as
unacceptable he delivered the ultimatum
at 6 p.m. on the 23rd of July 1914
slavka Mihailovich was a Belgrade doctor
the news of the ultimatum spread quickly
and soon there was a real alert streets
and bars were crowded with anxious
people everybody wondered what answer
our government would give whether a new
war would be avoided
[Music]
Austria's ultimatum called the world's
diplomats napping the French government
the French press and public opinion have
been inconceivably surprised Paris is
almost dead all the ambassador's but one
are out of town the kaiser was on his
yacht in norway when the text of the
austrian ultimatum arrived
the Kaiser arrived on deck as usual
after breakfast and said to me I was
still holding the wireless message
that's a pretty strong note for once in
a while it certainly is I replied but it
means war whereupon the Kaiser observed
that Serbia would never risk a war
she might not have rested on her own
but she had a powerful ally Russia
[Music]
convinced that Germany was warmongering
Russia began partial mobilization on the
28th of July
this was the second key stage of the
crisis as Britain's foreign secretary
Edward gray warmed from the moment the
dispute ceases to be one between
austria-hungary and Serbia and becomes
one in which another great power is
involved it cannot bid end in the
greatest catastrophe that has ever
befallen the continent of Europe
austria-hungary declared war on Serbia
that same day the first shots of the war
were fired from here the Austrian
fortress of Zimmermann just across the
river from Belgrade in the dead of night
major voya tank usage had the black hand
blow the only railway bridge windows
shattered to smithereens and broken
glass covered the floor patients started
screaming so it was true the war had
begun
it was still only a war between
austria-hungary and Serbia and on the
29th of July as the shells fell on
Belgrade there was a final attempt to
keep it that way a series of last-minute
telegrams flashed across Europe Tsar to
kaiser cousin to cousin del Willie an
ignoble war has been declared on a weak
country the indignation in Russia is
ignored
dear Nikki I am exerting my utmost
influence on the Austrians I confidently
hope you will help me deal with here but
if my truth shall not take any
provocative action but by now the crisis
was beyond the control of monarchs or
politicians it was in the hands of the
military from the moment Russia
mobilized her army German generals knew
their own clock was ticking
the alliance between France and Russia
meant that Germany faced a war on two
fronts her only hope was to deal with
France in the West before the main
Russian armies could invade from the
east that left no time to wait and see
for Germany Russian mobilization meant
war
Germany hadn't looked for a fight her
generals newer European war would be
long and devastating but every year
Russia was growing stronger better war
with her sooner than later on the first
of August Germany declared war on Russia
two days later she declared war on
Russia's Ally France
across Europe 10 million men headed off
to fight for all the bands and flag
waving many went unwillingly to war
where are we off to France Belgium or
the East at the station people wave
goodbye some with handkerchiefs I
thought of my wife and child left alone
at home
in fact it wasn't so much a thought as a
fearful shadow flitting over my soul
[Music]
girl how long is this down
my Bane is digging in my collar
strangling me when I look up I see a
pretty girl she was so full of
admiration so moved by it all that I
realized we've got to look handsome and
walked all off we marked to the sound of
shrill brass other where we're going he
died who'd have faced hacked up torn
apart all down the line my comrade
straighten up at the sight of him
[Music]
there's great excitement among my
comrades the bachelors are calm they're
even joking about it family men are
depressed some are saying we'll get
nothing from this war
we'll get beaten by the Germans what's
in it for us peasant soldiers why have
we got to fight for some offended Serbs
the leaders had little better idea why
they were fighting than the men they had
no lists of war aims Germany and Austria
Serbia Russia and France were all
convinced they were fighting a defensive
war forced on them by someone else the
only great power in Europe still on the
sidelines was Britain
and she was most reluctant to go to war
to help Serbian if it were physically
possible for Serbia to be towed out to
sea and sunk there the air of Europe
would at once seen cleaner Britain did
not regard herself formally bound by
treaty obligations as foreign secretary
gray assured Parliament we are not
parties to the franco-russian Alliance
we do not even know the terms of their
lands
on the 2nd of august 1914 Britain was
still at peace but only just
we've been in a state of great
excitement as the reservists are being
called up all the railways are guarded
everything points to the great war so
long expected being upon us in private
gray and other leaders New Britain had
to fight if Britain stayed neutral the
war would still threaten her global
position and if she failed to come to
the aid of her allies France and Russia
they too might become her enemies
so at 11:00 p.m. on the 4th of August
Britain declared war on Germany and the
thing she was fighting to protect became
the biggest single resource she brought
to the wall her empire with its vast
economic strength and worldwide network
of trade routes Britain's economic
strength underpinned her allies this was
a war kept going by alliances and what
happened on one front could have
critical effect on another Germany was
relying on her Ally austria-hungary to
hold the Eastern Front with Russia
massing on her borders Germany was
horrified to learn Austria had
concentrated her reserves not against
Russia but down in the Balkans to deal
with Serbia meanwhile the main Serbian
army had marched up from the south of
the country gathering numbers as it went
on the 12th of August it finally met the
Austrians at ser Mountain
the Serbs easily beat off the
austro-hungarian attack we could see the
enemy retreating along the river their
ammunition train left all their cards in
the valley and ran away as soon as they
were hit by our artillery a beaten army
no an uncontrolled mob ran towards the
border in senseless panic
austro-hungarian prisoners captured in
the first allied victory of the war
Austria had thought Serbia will be a
pushover Swift revenge for the murder of
Franz Ferdinand and their reprisals
against the Serbian people were vicious
it was a fight not just against an enemy
army but against whole peoples
in the first month of the war 4,000
civilians in western Serbia were killed
or disappeared their burnt houses down
looted raped killed 17 people all women
girls children tied with rope dead in a
ditch by the road all of them
slaughtered
in this war civilians would often be the
first to suffer as armies rolled over
frontiers and settled old scores on the
Western Front a French ambulance driver
wrote to his son do you ever think of
your daddy
walking day and night over plowed fields
and getting very used to shells
exploding all over the place I'd really
like to hear from you how school don't
be too quick to learn the geography of
Europe I think it's all about to change
Germany's resources were split between
two fronts and she couldn't easily smash
through france's chain of forts along
the border but belgium was weaker
[Music]
the Belgians put their faith in
reinforced concrete faults armed with
German Krupp guns the Germans brought
their massive siege guns the big
Bertha's named after crooks daughter to
smash them by the 16th of August all the
forts around the edge had fallen
[Music]
while Belgian and French forces bore the
brunt of the German onslaught the
British Expeditionary Force started to
land in France
[Music]
a hundred thousand men crossed the
channel in the early weeks of the war on
the 21st of August British troops moved
into position alongside the French fifth
Army near the Belgian town of Mons close
to the French border
[Music]
two days later the British with 70,000
men were hit by a German force four
times the size I focused the telescope
and saw a number of little grey figures
more and more were appearing
the Allies started an epic retreat south
just ahead of the German tidal wave the
war on the Western Front did not begin
in the trenches these early months were
mobile fast dangerous in the first four
weeks the German army lost over a
quarter of a million men killed wounded
and missing
the front was constantly shifting giving
men no time to dig in there was nowhere
to hide in fields swept by machine guns
and rapid firing artillery
nineteen year old British corporal
Edward wah was the youngest soldier to
receive the Victoria Cross in the war he
was killed but with their enemy's
capital almost in sight the Germans
advanced was outstripping supply lines
general von Moltke the German commander
grew alarmed he had no illusions that
victory was going to be quick or easy
by the 2nd of September 1914 the Germans
were just 30 miles from Paris
[Music]
trenches were dug sandbags filled
barricades erected
[Music]
the government left the capital for
Bordeaux triggering a general exodus a
million Parisians a third of its
inhabitants fled the city
[Music]
the fate of Paris and France would be
decided on the river Marne
for Terron a 300-mile front it was a
battle France had to win
[Music]
when a battle begins upon which the
nation's salvation depends we cannot
look back we must make every effort to
attack and repel the enemy suits who can
no longer advance MUSC
at all cops hold the captured ground and
die rather than retreat the German right
wing was sweeping down towards Paris the
French had detached troops from the east
moving them by rail to Paris to attack
the Germans in their flank the Allies
now outnumbered the Germans and chose
their moment to strike as the Germans
neared Paris a dangerous gap opened up
between their first and second armies
the British Expeditionary Force would be
driven in like a wedge
the fighting has begun French shells
explode incessantly in front of us we
seek shelter in a sunken Lane stomachs
loudly remind us of our hunger constant
shelling makes it impossible to reach up
and fetch an apple
a French plane suddenly appears it turns
and drops something the air fills with a
strange whistling followed by a violent
explosion its dropped a bomb seven
horses killed three men lost for us this
is something completely new none of us
know how to defend ourselves from this
monster of disguise some thought the ear
so as not to lose their nerve with the
incessant machine-gun fire our ranks are
decimated we cannot hold this position
much longer
[Music]
German reconnaissance planes monitored
the worsening situation at the man
pilots reports when to count for Boulos
Second Army headquarters of mom more
handwritten reports like this one
revealed the steady advance of the
Allies into the lethal gap between his
men and the first Army on the 8th of
September 1914 von Bulow ordered his
forces to retreat
[Music]
we continued to fall back passing
through French villages in the faces of
every inhabitant we source scorn and
derision
[Music]
the women leaned out of their windows
and thumb their noses and sneered at us
to them we were the defeated army
[Music]
the French referred to the battle as the
miracle on the Mon France had been saved
but at a cost of a quarter of a million
casualties the same losses as the
Germans no future battle on the Western
Front would average so many casualties
per day
33 German generals were quietly sacked
Malta was replaced by Erich von
Falkenhayn after tactful polls the
German people were never told the truth
about the man indeed the myth at the
war's end would be that the German army
was undefeated in the field but in a
sense they lost the first world war here
never having again the chance they had
at the man to win a resounding victory
against the Allies
[Applause]
Germany was now committed to a long war
and she didn't have the resources for it
in November 1914 falcon hein ordered his
troops to fall back to high ground and
dig in unable to break through the
Allies had few options but to dig in as
well the pattern for the Western Front
was now set with its line of trenches
stretching from the channel to
Switzerland 500 miles of mud and horror
there will be home to the living and the
dead for over three years
[Music]
and beyond no-man's land beyond the
German lines 11 million French and
Belgian civilians men women and children
would live under German occupation
Tuesday cruel Tuesday the German troops
ride past my window I hear a guttural
order ah soon the town is filled with
boss the beasts the swine's they
confiscate all weapons and demand a
quarter of a million francs in gold
[Music]
the extraordinary diary of a ten year
old French schoolboy titled Journal of
the Franco Bosch war
Eve conga lived with his family in this
house Insadong Eastern France Eve's
mother encouraged him to write a diary
to keep him busy during the summer
holidays it became a unique record of
the occupation and its brutalities they
have taken rather stolen from us straw
copper oats and the belongings of over 8
million people they have looted the
cellars the empty houses the walnut
trees the telegraph poles and the
livestock the German army was ordered to
live off the occupied territories
what the soldiers wanted they took
[Music]
moved on towards formal the inhabitants
were pensioners
[Music]
our boys found a stash of wine and eggs
we helped ourselves in the meantime the
church was shot to bits not a single
house was spared the pressure to
maintain a speedy advance through a
hostile population led to atrocities
these were not just the impetuous
actions of frightened troops we've been
ordered to kill everyone and wipe off
the map part of the left bank of the
mers it's a tremendously honorable task
and will be famous forever
many of the victims were French and
Belgian civilians the belgian town of
Tamim french troops have kept up a storm
of fire of the advancing Germans from
across the river song
the Germans rounded up civilians
including feminine school year for a
special task we are forced to advance
acting as a shield for the gems who
follow behind us but they fall mon down
by French bullets one of them charges at
us like a man possessed and only stops
when his bandit has gone right through
vomit and who leaves behind a widow and
three orphans after the French withdrew
the Germans were convinced that Belgian
snipers were active so they torched the
town
nearly 400 men women and children among
them the priest fathered on a were
herded into the main square by the
riverbank a German firing squad was
waiting for them a whistle blew and the
shooting began there was total chaos
among the crowd some fell dead others
pushed blindly I found myself on the
ground the tide moving above me I was
suffocating I was hit by two bullets in
the kidneys I felt their holes drill
into me I'll talk for veil and fell on
top of me dead no matter how hard I
tried I couldn't get out from under the
pile of corpses they cut the head of our
shield or one of the comb I saw it the
hand separated from the trunk
[Music]
the ultimate cruelty was when the
soldiers checked the victims one by one
any still alive they bayonetted
violently and threw them in the song
[Music]
a total of six and a half thousand
French and Belgian civilians including
women and children were killed in the
first month of the war
[Music]
and the Germans rounded up thousands of
teenage boys and girls for forced labor
the last three weeks we have spent in
the most terrible anguish and moral
torture possible for a mother's heart at
3:00 in the morning these German heroes
go out with a military band and machine
guns and bayonets fixed to hunt down
women and children to take them away
God knows where or why
any resistance was mostly passive
the Germans rounded up local leaders
then posted notices of their execution
and they used another method to ensure
civil obedience they took hostages
including Eve congas father the hour is
near the last meal together the goodbyes
the hugs I want to cry father walks to
the station with just us boys I bite my
lip and fill my eyes tightening father
says I love you farewell
remember me and he kissed us every night
I'll say a prayer my father and the
other hostages
[Music]
civilian men women and children were
packed into cattle trucks sent to
concentration camps as hostages and
forced laborers several thousand French
and 58,000 Belgians
far from being broken by the German
occupation Eve conga who became a
prisoner in the Second World War was
politicized by it there's hardly any
bread
the swine's will leave us to die of
hunger too bad after all we are French
and if we have to die we shall die but
France will be victorious
[Music]
in the next episode of the First World
War
global conflict rocks empires as Germany
takes the war across the high seas
through Africa and into the Middle East
[Music]